---
layout: single
title:  "Sharks"
date: 2018-08-05 19:02:11 -0400
categories: personal nyc writing
---

*As I mentioned in my post on my college applications, I am posting the writing samples from my application to Columbia University. This is the third of three (standalone) pieces*

## Sharks

*Monday March 2th*

Sharks. Mark looked around and realized he was surrounded by sharks. The whole twentieth floor of the pompous office building was nothing more than a tank full of sharks. The building’s enormous glass walls contributed to this image in his head, as if they were built to give imaginary spectators an optimal view over the activity inside the tank. In Mark’s imagination, the lonely pigeon on the parapet became an annoying child hitting the glass in impatience; as to urge the creatures inside to increased action.

Not that this incitement was in any way necessary. Mark realized he was the only one on the floor who didn’t seem to take part in the general buzz, so he diverted his attention away from the giant windows back to the numbers and graphs flashing over his computer screen and tried to mimic the twenty sharks in suits around him.

Just like the gentlemen around him, Mark earned his living through the practice of speculation. In their case, speculating meant that they aggressively attacked companies in troubled waters on the stock market, profiting from their eventual bankruptcy or the plummeting of their stock price. Recently, the sharks had smelled the blood of a different kind of prey, the biggest fish of them all. The sharks were now attacking not mere companies, but whole countries. Why going after the bankruptcy of a Greek company, when you can bankrupt the whole of Greece? The deeper the political and economic crisis, the more money they made. Every Greek firm in distress, every failed negotiation, every stone thrown by a protester in Athens meant an additional dollar that flowed into the shark tank.

In a separate, smaller tank resided the most dangerous creature of them all. He was the brain behind everything, the unchallenged leader of this shiver of sharks. The Great White. In no way did the physique of this man resemble that of a predator, let alone that of the king of sharks. He had an ordinary if somewhat clumsy appearance, with a badly cut grey suit, a plump face and a rather poor haircut. Mark had sought long and hard for any predator look in the man’s eyes, but he had found not even a spark of it. There did not seem to be much activity behind these eyes. This discovery had made Mark shiver with fear, because it made him realize that this shark was the greatest predator of them all. This creature, this Great White, was the ultimate master of disguise, because he had done something Mark thought was impossible: he had made his eyes lie; for Mark knew that behind those eyes was an unparalleled killer instinct.

Only a truly fearsome creature could be the right leader of this group of killer sharks, and it seemed that this Great White was born for the job. Mark on the other hand had been working for the company for over 15 years and still felt uncomfortable in the tank. He was pretty decent at doing his job –he mostly provided the stable stocks and financial instruments needed by the sharks as counterweight when they launched one of their attacks. He had also helped tweak the software the sharks used to monitor the behavior of their prey. The sharks respected his work, and he himself was tolerated in their presence, and over the years he had become relatively good at suppressing the moral aspect of his job, yet he had never managed to feel completely at ease.

There was no particular reason why Mark took the decision that Monday morning, no event that triggered him, that caused his restlessness to finally overtake him. For many years he had thought about it but a sudden sense of urgency came to him. He had to act, and he had to act soon. A week, two weeks at most; the plan was clear in his head, and not much further elaboration was needed.

*Thursday, March 12th*

The little clock at the bottom-right corner of his screen told Mark it was 3:00 AM. Feeling his heart beating in his chest, Mark told himself to calm down. He had plenty of time. He looked around the tank, now entirely dark except for the light coming from his desk. It had been like this for the past four hours. The Great White had been only mildly surprised when Mark told him he would be working that late. All of the sharks were workaholics, hardly any of them left the office before 9 PM, and it was very common to stay and work until early in the morning, although it was not something Mark did on a regular basis. Then the Great White remembered that Mark had been doing investing on the Nikkei (1) recently, so he nodded appreciatively and did not give it a second thought.

Mark was doing business on the Tokyo Stock Exchange that night, but he wasn’t trading on the Nikkei. He was currently involved in a series of unregulated transactions, of which the vast size was only exceeded by their sheer outrageousness. His IT skills and above all the hubris of the company, that resulted in an almost non-existent limit on the volumes of the financial transactions that the sharks could do, made it possible for him to perform this series of disastrous, self-destructive transactions. Mark had considered a multitude of options, but in the end he realized that the sharks could only be stopped forever by making them suffocate, in other words, by destroying their tank. That was what had to be done, and that was what he was doing. He felt it, as he executed the algorithm with a final mouse click, he felt he was beating down the glass of the tank, which soon would shatter to pieces, and the inevitability comforted him.

Mark left the building at 6:00 AM exactly as he had planned and two hours later he was sitting in a full commuting train. The pouring rain made it hard to get a good view over the skyline, but as Mark looked outside the window he could clearly see how the lights on the twentieth floor of the building were turned on, and how, barely a minute later, cracks started to appear in the glass walls of the tank. Even in the noisy train he could hear the loud blast when the walls shattered into pieces and he saw how the sharks were pulled out, the Great White first and then one by one the others, along with the water that was flowing rapidly out of the tank. The sharks were all moving their mighty fins, furiously but in vain, as they fell down in the deep between the raindrops. Mark turned his head and did not look back again. It was done, and whatever was to follow was of no importance. It had to be done and he had done it.

*Monday, September 15th*

The head judge of the criminal court was blinking his eyes nervously in response to the constant flashes coming from dozens of cameras. It was the opening day of a much anticipated trial that over the past months had already been made over and over again in media worldwide. Even more fascinating than the sheer size of the affair –only the errors in the estimates of the damage done were running into hundreds of millions –were the motives of the suspect. All experts agreed upon the fact that the whole series of transactions was indisputably done with one distinct goal: ruining the suspect’s own company.

The reason why someone would commit such an outrage, however, was the subject of wild speculation. Some argued Mark was some kind of failed, misunderstood Robin Hood, which seemed unlikely, as it were mostly other big financial institutions that had profited from the transactions. Others believed he wanted to create chaos in the financial world by burning piles of money, as a sort of sophisticated Joker character from a Batman movie. One particularly romantic journalist compared him to the Norse berserker, fearsome but completely mad warriors who bite their own shields and attack anyone who comes near them, friend or foe alike. One newspaper, however, had come up with a ‘reliable source’, someone who had regular contact with the suspect, and who claimed that Mark himself did not make much sense when asked about the motives behind his actions. According to the source, Mark just kept repeating the same phrase over and over again, which everybody had heard by now, but still no one understood. ‘Someone had to ...I had to stop the sharks’

*(1) The Nikkei is short for Japan's Nikkei 225 Stock Average, the leading and most-respected index of Japanese stocks, trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE). Because of the time difference, trading on the TSE happens during nighttime in the US (Source: Investopedia).*
