---
layout: single
title:  "Applying to Columbia"
date: 2018-08-05 18:44:51 -0400
categories: personal
---

*I remember my application to KU Leuven, 8 years ago. The previous night we had held a goodbye party for a friend who was going to study in London. It had been a rather successful party. I was tired and slightly hungover, so I was relieved that the application process consisted of little more than showing my high school diploma, picking a field of study and having a (very unflattering) picture taken.*

*Seven years later, applying for graduate studies in the US turned out to be a more laborious process. Each of the ten or so grad school applications required personal recommendations from professors or employers and pages and pages of forms about my educational and professional background. In addition, each school asked for a **statement of purpose**, a personal essay describing my interests, why I picked that particular school and what I wanted to achieve with my degree.*

*To be honest, not every statement of purpose I produced turned out to be a brilliant piece of writing, and after half a dozen applications, some essays inevitably became somewhat repetitive. That being said, I was happy with how my statement of purpose for Columbia University turned out. In hindsight, that shouldn't no surprise as it was the school and program that I found the most exciting.*

*Here is that statement of purpose, comprised of a personal as well as professional essay. In a separate post, I will add three other writing samples I had to include in my application to demonstrate my writing and journalism abilities.*

## Personal Essay

Uncooked spaghetti and marshmallows, these modest foods color one of my fondest memories: playing traditional Belgian youth movement games with a class of Chinese teenagers in Shanghai. Three years ago, during a semester studying abroad in Shanghai, I found a job as an English tutor. Every Friday, I would take the train from my college campus across the city to help Chinese students at the Jiao Tong University prepare for their studies abroad in Europe or the United States.

Chinese students abroad have a hard time integrating and often face loneliness and depression, so Craig, an entrepreneurial English teacher, had set up after-school sessions to help students improve their English conversation skills and acclimate them to American and European social customs and practices. Craig was one of the most inspiring people I have ever met. Over the course of a few years, he worked as a successful translator, teacher and software developer. Not content with being a great programmer, he was involved in one of Shanghai’s CoderDojos, small clubs of volunteers teaching kids the basics of computer programming. Three years later, when I felt I had enough experience, I followed his example and joined my local CoderDojo in Belgium. He won one of Jiao Tong University’s teaching award, but still organized extra tutoring sessions because he felt his students needed to develop conversational skills outside of the formal classroom setting.

While the tutoring sessions were held in a classroom, the activities we organized were informal and playful, ranging from pub quizzes over speed-dating sessions to Halloween or Christmas parties. One Friday, I organized a session around youth movements. I was a boy scouts leader and I thought it would be fun to give an introduction to a movement that is very popular in America and Europe, but not very well-known in China —in fact, scouting was forbidden by the Communist Party up until 2006. While Belgian scouts don’t focus as much on discipline, structure and survival skills as their counterparts in the US or other European countries and prefer a more casual, playful and levelled approach, developing outdoors and survival skills are still an important part of our activities.

To give the students some insight into scouting, I prepared an interactive demonstration of one of the most impressive scouting activities: pioneering, described by Wikipedia as the art of using ropes and wooden spars joined by lashings and knots to create a structure. Of course, large-scale pioneering is tricky to perform inside a classroom —for similar reasons, we had to abandon the idea of building a campfire— but the practical skills, problem solving and teamwork (in English, of course) involved in pioneering can be practiced just as well in tabletop pioneering, using uncooked spaghetti as spars and marshmallows as joints.

Proudly I watched my students work together to build impressively high and stable structures. There was definitely some engineering talent in the room, and it was great to see how some of the students who had been the most shy and insecure during English conversation were now leading their team in maximizing the architectural potential of their culinary resources.

## Professional Essay

Over the past century, oil has arguably been the most important material in the world economy. While the transformation to an oil-based economy has resulted in incredible wealth creation, a disproportionately large part of that wealth has gone to a small group of oil barons, while the nefarious effects continue to impact the whole population. The parallels with the data barons of the twenty-first century are uncanny. Today, the world’s five biggest companies are tech companies. Just like the oil barons of the past, these extremely profitable companies are reluctant to address the egregious effects of their business, such as privacy concerns, misinformation and monopoly forming. They seem to be quite effective in swaying policy-makers as well as public opinion. What’s more, with over 2.5 billion gigabytes of data generated every minute, their influence will only increase in the future.

Whether keeping tech companies in check, reminding policy-makers of their responsibilities or informing the public of the implications of the explosion of digital data in our society, the role of journalists in a world driven by data seems more crucial, challenging and encompassing than ever. By pursuing a dual master’s degree at Columbia University, I aim to contribute to this data and technology’s role in shaping the tomorrow’s future. I want to hold myself and others accountable to the degree of impact technology has had on the world’s geo-political economy; part of being able to contribute also involves having a stronger knowledge of computer science fundamentals for me.

Since I wrote my first line of ‘Hello World’ in Notepad years ago, I have been fascinated by computer science and software development. I have gradually transitioned from a business-focused degree to my current full-time job as a developer. I have enjoyed working on financial algorithms, online ad campaigns and a drone service platform, but when try to remember my most accomplished moments over the past years, I think of the blog post  I wrote describing the methodology behind a payment behavior algorithm in layman’s terms, a viral Quora answer on the perception of using StackOverflow and a presentation of development frameworks to tech-unsavvy founders.

These examples, modest in scope and impact, made me realize my passion lies in educating others on technology and its impact on society. I want to study cryptography and network systems to share a more informed analysis of the impact of blockchain technology on our monetary system. Similarly, studying the technicalities of artificial intelligence to elevate the discussion on the ethical and moral implications of our increased reliance on algorithms in decision-making. In other words, more than a mere intellectual interest in algorithms, data structures or natural language processing, my motivation to study computer science is my desire to contribute to the debate on the role of technology in our society.

Lastly, I see this graduate degree as more than a means to expand my computer science and journalistic toolset. I have always been passionate about mentoring and knowledge sharing, and graduate education gives me the chance to further incorporate that dedication in my career, both academically and professionally, and grow not just into a seasoned journalist or software developer but a mentor, creator and influencer in my field. It is also an opportunity to immerse myself in the academic environment of two renowned departments at Columbia University, benefit from and participate in groundbreaking research in both journalism and computer science, and grow as a person in one of the most diverse and innovative cities in the world.


